---
title: Editorial
taxonomy:
    category:
        - docs
visible: true
---

In our opening paper we congratulated our Auditors on the number of contributions with which our Readings commenced, and considered it as a proof of the pleasure received, and the advantages derived from a periodical stimulus to the exertion of their talents. We have not less reason to be satisfied with the Productions which will be read this Evening and we look forward with a well founded hope of a Brilliant Season.

The first Poem entitled “Love and a Cottage” is a pleasant and ingenious ridicule on those effusions which young Ladies and Gentlemen, ignorant of the cares and duties of Life, are apt to pour forth in verse and prose to the annoyance of the wiser part of their readers, and to the injury of those who are as ignorant and as sentimental as themselves. The Anagrammatical Charade will afford a little amusement to unravel its meaning, and cannot but be pleasing to the Person it is intended to compliment. Of the “Nine Lines” written “by way of apology for eight” it is proper to premise that a bracelet had strayed from the arm of one of our correspondents (One to whom the Muses have been lavish of their choicest favours and to whom the Attic Chest is indebted for some of its most brilliant gems,) which was taken up and restored by a discourteous knight, without any compliment or a single expression of civility. The poor Wight was probably too happy to have preserved it for the owner to think of rhyming about it, but the Lady — expected verses for sooth, an Ode, an Elegy, or an Epigram — and being disappointed even of a promise threatened to shew her sense of his neglect in eight lines for the Chest, but Her anger however could not be kept within the proscribed limits, and so elegantly has she expressed her resentment that the Gentleman tho’ he may lament his inattention or inability cannot but be delighted with the consequences. The fair writer encourages such delinquency by honouring it with such notice. 

## D 3311 Attic Chest 293031_0039

The song to the Air of “Waly, Waly, Love is bonnie” is an excellent imitation of the Style and manner of Burns. The Rosicrucian has puzzled us completely with his old Philosophical Aenigma *Un*riddled. We *wot* not what he means by the old Aenigma, nor *ween* how that can be *un*riddled which still remains utterly incomprehensible. We fear that like one we formerly alluded to beginning “Alia Lelia Crispus” it will remain for ever unknown unless the profound Philosopher in compassion to the Foolosopher will unbutton the old fashioned quaint-cut doublet of the subject and exhibit him in his native nakedness. However to stimulate our friends to attempt the unravelling of this Gordian Web, The Editress promises to reward the successful operator with a plauditory stanza after her best and newest fashion provided the answer is the produce of Mother-wit unaided by previous knowledge or auxiliary Information.

We know not which of our correspondents has instigated the Quarrel between **Tuesday** and **Wednesday** of which the first intimation was received from the facetious Poem called *Vox Planetarum*, read at our last meeting; but the Glove that was then thrown down on the part of Mercury we learn from the *Vox Stellarum*, to be read this Evening, has been taken up by Mars and we are threatened with a squabble among the Constellations. How this important contest will end we are unable to conjecture without the assistance of our learned friend the egregious Dr. Moore, who in all things relative to the intentions of the Celestial Bodies sees as far into the Millstone as he that picks it. “The Lawyer and the soldier roasted” is a pleasant description of a ludicrous incident and a good delineation of a character not uncommon, that of affected delicacy — a sensibility which trembles at trifles and is overcome with apprehension when no danger exists. Extreme sensibility when real is distressing to those of firmer nerves and often causes the danger which it is most anxious to avoid, but when it is factitious instead of pitying we view it with contempt. This species of affectation we think has been encouraged by some lines in Thomson’s Seasons which *follow his* ludicrous description of Fox hunting and the scene of boisterous conviviality which concludes The Fox Hunter’s Day.